Information Security
	Application Security
	Network Security
	Data Security

What comes to your mind when you hear term "Cybersecurity"?
"HACKING"

Wannacry Ransomware Attack - 2017
Uber Data breach
AIMS

Consequences of a cyber attack
1. Personal Data Loss
2. Financial Loss
3. Reputation Loss
4. Loss in business

What can you do to prevent such attacks?
Cybersecurity Practices

Cybersecurity definition

It is about protecting hardware as well as software components of internet connected assets, with the help of security controls, to mitigate threats.

I have a physical register containing confidential rating data of employees and I want to protect them, is it under Cybersecurity domain? - No

This falls under a broader domain called as Information Security

Information Security deals with protecting any information, be it physical or digital
When it is digital, you can tell it comes under Cybersecurity

Cybersecurity is a subdomain within Information Security, that specializes on protectig internet connected systems and their data!

Basic Cybersecurity Termiologies
--------------------------------
1. Asset
Refers to anything that needs to be protected from attacks
Eg- Company laptops, Data, Internal applications, Servers, Employees etc.

2. Threat
Any possible consequence that can happen if an asset is not protected properly
Eg - You are standing on airport security check, and you decide to skip that line
Threat doesnt mean that it is destined to occur!
Threats can be knowingly or unknowingly
Eg - Not regularly updating your laptop OS - someone can perform an attack for which no patch has been done in your system

3. Vulnerablity
Refer to weaknesses/ loop holes within security of a system, that could be exploited!
Eg - Having an un-updated OS
Threat is the possible consequence, if a vulnerability is exploited!
Vulnerability is something that can be exploited, Threat is the outcome if that happens.

4. Security Controls
Refers to actions/ techniques you use to protect your assets from attacks
Eg- Patching your laptop regularly, MFA, Using firewalls etc

5. Attack
Whenever threat becomes real, it is called a cyber attack
All attacks are threats, but not all threats are attacks!

Basic Cybersecurity Principles
------------------------------
1. Principle of Least Privilege

Are we provided administrator access in our laptops? - No
Why?
Lets say you have admin access in your infy lap - what all things can you do?
I might misuse this privilege,which will cause harm to organization

The principle tells that provide users only the basic privileges, that is just enough for them to do their day to day activities.

2. Defense in Depth

You are going for a Goa trip for a week -  you will lock gate, lock all the rooms, lock all the lockers, lock all the room doors.

Cant you just keep the gate alone locked?

Defense in Depth principle emphasises on havng multiple, layered security controls, so that even if one layer is not protectedor or gets attacked, other layers can still be protected!

Security Objectives
-------------------
Refer to the minimum set of requirements that should be satisfied by any security solution! (CIA Triad)

1. Confidentiality

Data should remain secret between the permitted parties!

2. Integrity

Data should remain protected from unwanted modifications!

3. Availability

If you are allowed to access a resource, you should be able to access it whenever you want to!

3 supporting security objectives - they support CIA Triad - AAA 

1. Authentication

Process of verifying the identity of someone.
How a system can authenticate you(identify you)?
	We use authenticators
	Eg - Password, Biometrics, OTPs, RFID Tags etc

Any combination of authenticators will be used to successfuly identify someone

Username + Password - sufficient? (1 authenticator)
Username + Password + OTP - sufficient? (2 authenticators)

We always prefer having multiple authenticators - MFA (Multi factor authentication)

2. Authorization

Checking whether someone has permission to access something or not
Someone - Subject - one wants access
Something - Object - resources

Checking if a subject has proper access to an object or not

3. Accountability

People are made responsible for any actions they perform, and they should not deny anything that they have done (non repudiation)

Domains of Cybersecurity
------------------------
1. Identity Access Management (IAM)
2. Infrastructure Security
	Network Security
	Endpoint Security (endpoints refer to devices that connect to network)
3. Governance, Risk and Compliance
4. Ethical Hacking
5. Security Operations Center Management - Real time monitoring - they have to mitigate the attacks, prevent, eradicate

Overview of Network Security
----------------------------
What do you mean by a Computer network?

Group of computers connected together
 
Why they should be connected?

1. Communication - sending/receiving information
2. Sharing resources

Lets say there are 5 machines in a network, how will each of these machines identify each other?

Two addresses are provided to machines.

1st one is called as Physical address - MAC address - which is every machine by its manufacturer (the one who creates the Network Interface Card)
Unique for every machine
Even if machine is not part of network, you have MAC address

2nd one is called as Logical Address - IP Address - is assigned to a machine, only when they are connected to a network,and this is used to identify other machines within a network
IP addresses should be also unique between all machines in a network

Why you need a logical address, when physical address is there for every machine and they are unique?

How to know my IP address and MAC address?

If you are a Windows OS user, go to Command Prompt and type ipconfig
If you are a Linux OS user, go to Terminal and type ifconfig

Network Security Controls
1. Firewalls

Firewalls are kept at the boundary of two networks (usually an untrusted network and a trusted network), to monitor and filter all the traffic incoming and outgoing and will only allow those traffic , that is permitted to be.

Unless we explicitly write a rule to permit, traffic wont be allowed!

How to write a rule in firewall?

Lets say that My machine wants to send data to Abhay's machine.
The actual data will be divided into various packets - each packet has two sections - metadata(header), actual data(payload)

Packets wil propagate on the network. Firewall receives these packets, checks the information in packet header, and checks if any corresponding rules are there that allows or denies.

If any rule is present to allow, it allows, else it blocks!

Such a firewall ruleset is called as Access Control List(ACL)

2. Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS)

What is an intrusion?
Any unauthorized events within a network

IDS will scan network/ host machines to detect if any intrusions are present, if they find intrusions, they will send alerts to the security team for them to invesigate.

Examples of intrusion
1. Multiple failed logins
2. System getting slowed down without any reasons suddenly (Virus/worm attack)
3. Random files getting created without you creating them
4. File permissions getting changed without you changing
5. Network slowing down suddenly

How to detect intrusions?

a. Signature Detection

You know the patterns of various attacks - so, if you see any such patterns in your network, it suggests that attack is happening and you will term it as an intrusion.

b. Anomaly Detection

You know the basic behavior of a network - so whenever it deviates from its basic behavior, the tool suspects something wrong, and suspects an intrusion

Examples - Snort IDS, Suricata IDS

3. Demilitarized Zones (No man's area)

I want to access lex.infosysapps.com - where will this app server be present? - It will be within your network

If you block HTTP connections to this network, will anyone be able to access it outside? - NO!

You create a DMZ, and place this server there.

Whenever you want to access resources between public and private networks, create a DMZ and place such resources in DMZ!

How to create a DMZ?

Use 2 firewalls.
One firewall (called internal firewall) will block HTTP to internal network, another one(called external firewall) will allow HTTP to the DMZ

Overview of Data Security
-------------------------
How to ensure Data Confidentiality and Integrity?
	With the help of Cryptographic techniques

Cryptography is a subdomain of Information Security, that strictly deals with protecting data!

Cryptographic Techniques
------------------------
Encryption/ Decryption

Lets say I want to send a secret message to Mithun, and I dont want anyone else to intercept that message. What would you suggest to ensure the same?

First Solution - Create a separate isolated communication channel between both of them, and send all data through that channel
	Good solution
	Practically infeasible, theoretically feasible

Second Solution - Hide the data that i want to communicate over some other data, and send that to the receiver
	Better solution
	Hiding takes a lot of effort to keep it as secret as possible
	Steganography - deals with hiding data
		Image steganography - LaDinci Codes
		Audio/ Music Steganography
		Video Steganography

Third solution - Let sender and receiver communicate between themselves only in a language they both can understand, and no one else!
	Best solution
	Minimal efforts compared to other solutions
	Finding a language to talk such that no one else can understand

Encryption - Process of transforming the data to a form, which only the intended receiver can understand!

Decryption - Process of transforming the data received from a sender to its original form - inverse process of decryption

Original Data is getting transformed!

3 terms are associated with Encryption

1. Plaintext
	Readable data, it is the data that needs to be transformed
2. Ciphertext
	Unreadable data, Scrambled data, it is the transformed data

Encryption converts a plaintext to a ciphertext

3. Encryption Algorithm/Cipher
	Refers to a set of mathematical operations that are fixed per 	algorithm that converts plaintext to ciphertext

Lets say I have a plaintext "Hello", I encrypted it using a cipher, and I got a cipher text "NJKLG".
Now, if i get this cipher text "NJKLG" anywhere, doesnt that mean that plaintext will be "Hello", if cipher is same?
	It will be same as mathematical operations are same!

Doesnt that dilute security?  -Yes!

We want to have different output for same input everytime, even if cipher is same, how to achieve this?
	A randomizing parameter is used for encryption, which ensures that the 	output is randomized
	This parameter is what we call as "Encryption Key"
	A key is a binary string of fixed length, prescribed by the cipher

Depending upon how many keys you use, we can classify encryption techniques into 2:
1. Symmetric encryption

Same key used for encryption, is used for decryption also.
Examples - AES (Bitlocker), DES, IDEA, Blowfish, Triple DES etc

How to share the key between sender and receiver?
First solution - create a separate channel for transmitting key

Lets say n people want to communicate with each other, how many channels/connections you need between each of them?

n people, need connections with n-1 people --> n(n-1)
Assuming channel as bidirective, number of channels required is
n(n-1)/2 (nC2)

Such a solution is not scalable, as number of users increase, huge number of channels would be needed!

Key management is a major problem in Symmetric encryption

Feasible solution - Key exchange algorithms, which helps in generating same key values in sender and receiver side
Some set of mathematical operations, when performed on both sender and receiver side, they both will obtain the key for encryption!
Key exchange algorithms work on asymmetric cryptographic system!

Asymmetric cryptography is used in Symmetric cryptography to exchange keys!!

Why not ask every user to manage their own key? - in such a case, managing keys centrally can be avoided, sending keys can be avoided

2. Asymmetric Encryption

Focuses on eliminating key management, by making every use responsible for managing their keys!

Key used for encryption will be different from the key used for decryption - How is it possible? - MATHEMATICS!!!!

There are two keys for every user - one key is known to everyone (your public key), while other key is only known to themselves (private key)!

There is a mathematical relation between these private-public keys such that, the operations you do with one key, could be inversed with the help of another key
Prime factorization problem - If i take very large two prime numbers and find  its product and if i give that product to you, you cannot find their prime factors in a computationally feasible time! (RSA Encryption is based on this problem)

How Asymmetric encryption works?

Email analogy
Sender - me, Sourabh - receiver

1. Obtain email address of Sourabh (Email address is publicly known)
2. Craft the message
3. Send the message to email address of Sourabh

At receiver's end,
1. Sourabh needs to login to mailbox using password (Password is privately known)
2. Then, he can view the message from me

(DISCLAIMER: email is not public key, password is not private key!!)

Rewrite,

1. Obtain the public key of receiver
2. Craft the message
3. Send the message by encrypting with public key of receiver

At receiver's end,
1. Receiver uses their private key to decrypt
2. Upon successful, receiver can get original message back

Encryption key- Receiver's public key
Decryption key - Receiver's private key

It involves lot of mathematical operations, which makes it complex as well as slower compared to symmetric systems!

This is why still we prefer Symmetric encryption over asymmetric encryption for protecting data confidentiality!

Hashing

It is used to ensure data integrity!
Hashing refers to the process of converting any size, any length data to a fixed size data of an irreversible form with the help of special mathematical functions, called hash functions!

Eg- 1 GB Drive ----- Hash function ----- 256 bit string
    3 MB Image ----- Hash function ----- 256 bit string
    1 GB Video ----- Hash function ----- 256 bit string

From the output (hash value), you cannot get back the original data!!!
Once you hash a data, you cannot get its original form from the hashvalue.

Lets say I want to send a message "Hello" to Sudeesh.
I obtain the hash value of message " Hello"
H(Hello) = abc123

I send this sender side hash value to the receiver along with Encrypted data.
At receiver side, they decrypt the data and they also take the hash value of "Hello"
H(Hello) = abc123

Lets say that someone in between modified this message to "Hi"
At receiver side, you receive Hi
H(Hi) = acb123

Are hash values matching? - NO!
If they are not matching, it means that the data was tampered!

If hash values match at both sender and receiver sides, it means that the data is untampered!!! (Data integrity is maintained)

What if the string "Hi" also gives same hash value as that of "Hello"?
Receiver wont be able to detect that tampering has happened - because, hash values are matching!

Your hash function should always generate unique hash values!!!! No two data should generate same hash value!!!!
Hash Collision - when two data gives same hash value!

If Im sending the hash value in it raw form to receiver, what if someone manipulates the hash value?
Will hashvalues match? - No
What will receiver assume? - That data is tampered!

How to send hash value securely to receiver?

Encrypt the hash value! (Assume asymmetric encryption)
Usually it should be with receiver's public key - but that is already used to encrypt the data that you send
If you want to encrypt hash value, use sender's private key for encryption, and the receiver will use sender's public key for decryption.

Such an encrypted hash value is what you call as Digital Signature.

Why should we use Sender's keys for digital signature?

We can confirm the authenticity of the message, that the message originated from actual sender and no one inpersonated!
It confirms non-repudiation because, sender cannot deny that they didnt send message

What if they deny?
It means that their private key is no longer key, which is not the case ideally

Do you think public keys need to be secured?
Yes!
You can verify someone's identity with public keys.
Lets say if i impersonate your public key, what will happen?

Receiver, when they use my public key for decryption, they will verify my impersonated identity!

We have Certificates for all websites and entities!
Digital certificates are verified public keys, where your public key is verified by  trusted 3rd party!

Most important application of Hashing is storing passwords securely!

Always store passwords in hashed form, i.e, store hash values of password in DB.

Lets say I'm visiting a web app for first time, I need to sign up
I will provide a username and password (infy@123)
Take hash value of password - H(infy@123) = bac123 and store this hash value in DB

Username	|Password
--------------------------
reman		|bac123

When i login next time onwards, i will provide my username and password.
Whatever password i provide in text box, its hash value will be taken and compared with the hash value corresponding to user in DB
If the hash values match, it means password correct, else incorrect!

You are not storing password in its plaintext form - so, even if someone gets the hash value from DB, will they get your actual password? NO - because hash values are irreversible!!

f(x) = y
x is the input, y = output

x = plaintext, y=ciphertext

y=E(x)
x=E-1(y) ----> inverse

Application Security
--------------------
To develop any software we use Software Development Life Cycle.
Waterfall model - Primitive
Rapid Application Development
Agile
DevOps
DevSecOps ------ You take care of application security in every phase of life cycle

Consider normal SDLC phases, how to incorporate security in each phase?

Requirements Phase
	Consider security as a Functional Requirements
	Add security measures for each functionality!
	Eg - Client wants login page (enforce MFA)

Design Phase
	Threat Modeling
	You develop a Data flow diagram in a Threat Modeling Tool
		OWASP Dragon, Microsoft SDL Threat Modeling Tool
	From DFD, the tool will automatically suggest potential 	vulnerabilities and ways to mitigate them in each data flow

Coding Phase
	Secure Coding Practices

Testing Phase
	Static Application Security testing 
	Dynamic Application Security Testing (run time)

Deployment Phase
	Dont use any default accounts in deployed environment

Maintanence Phase
	Continously monitor for vulnerabilities, proper timely patching of vulnerabilties

Popular Cybersecurity Certifications
------------------------------------
CompTIA Security+ or EC Council CEH

CISSP, CISM - Senior folks
